# OpenDP Documentation

Contents:
- [Building the docs locally](#building-the-docs-locally)
- [Building the docs with Github Actions](#building-the-docs-with-github-actions)
- [Style guide](#style-guide)

## Building the docs locally

### Prerequisites

The steps below assume the use of [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) on a Mac.

```shell
cd docs
brew install pandoc
brew install basictex

sudo tlmgr install physics
sudo tlmgr install tcolorbox
sudo tlmgr install environ
sudo tlmgr install catchfile

python3 -m venv .venv-docs
source .venv-docs/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Python docs

Once depencies are installed, to buid python docs:

```shell
make html
open build/html/index.html
```

This local build differs from the hosted docs, generated by `docs.yml`:
- In CI we use spinx-multiversion to build docs for all releases of OpenDP.
- CI also builds R documentation and LaTeX docs.

### R docs

We use pkgdown to build R documentation.
To build R docs locally, from the project root run

```shell
bash tools/r_stage.sh -d
```

### Rust docs

Instead of using GitHub CI and Pages to build and host the Rust documentation,
we rely on docs.rs for both. To build the Rust docs locally:

```shell
cd docs
make html-rustdoc
```

### LaTeX docs

It is possible to fully simulate all documentation locally, 
with functioning links across documentation sites and proofs.

If the following environment variables are set, Sphinx and Rustdoc will build with links to locally-hosted docs:
```shell
export OPENDP_SPHINX_PORT=8020;
export OPENDP_RUSTDOC_PORT=8021;
```

Build all .tex files and copy them into the Sphinx documentation site:
```shell
make latex
```

Start two servers that host a local Sphinx docs site and local Rustdoc site:
```shell
make server
```

Putting these commands together, to update all docs sites and proofs, run:
```shell
make html html-rustdoc latex
```
Changes should automatically manifest without restarting the server.

## Building the docs with Github Actions

Docs are deployed to http://docs.opendp.org using GitHub Actions.

Note that `make html` is replaced with `make versions` to build multiple versions (branches, tags) using the [`sphinx-multiversion`](https://sphinx-contrib.github.io/multiversion) extension.
Be sure you have installed `sphinx-multiversion` from the fork in requirements.txt. 
Otherwise, you will get an error that includes: 

```
/docs/source/api/index.rst:4:toctree contains reference to nonexisting document 'api/python/index'
```

Version selection for `make versions` is computed before Sphinx starts by
`docs/tools/select_smv_versions.py`, then passed into `conf.py` via
`OPENDP_SMV_TAG_WHITELIST`. This keeps `conf.py` static when
`sphinx-multiversion` re-evaluates it inside per-ref temporary build directories.

## Style guide

### `opendp.org` vs. `docs.opendp.org` vs. `README.md`

`opendp.org` is the OpenDP **Project** site.
We should not document software there, beyond a blog post for new releases.
Code formatting in Wordpress can be a headache, and we don't get the benefit of doctests.

`docs.opendp.org` is the OpenDP **Library** site.
It is organized to reflect the needs of different classes of users.
- [Getting Started](https://docs.opendp.org/en/stable/getting-started/index.html) provides just a little background on differential privacy as well as a tutorial on OpenDP. We want to touch on all the main features, but won't get into details. It should make sense read from start to finish: Links for more information are fine, but it shouldn't require forward references.
- [API](https://docs.opendp.org/en/stable/api/index.html) is a reference primarily for Python OpenDP library users, and provides links to R and Rust documentation. It includes both a top-down "User Guide" and a bottom-up "API Reference".
- [Theory](https://docs.opendp.org/en/stable/theory/index.html) provides background information and motivation for differential privacy, and OpenDP in particular.
- [Contributing](https://docs.opendp.org/en/stable/contributing/index.html) is for people interested in contributing to the OpenDP Library.

After someone has read "Contributing", they can turn to a `README.md` or comments in the code for the details on a particular part of the codebase. 

### RST idioms

The OpenDP library is multilingual:
Although there are separate API references for R and Rust, the high-level descriptions are ideally applicable to multiple languages.
We will use RST `tab-set` and `tab-item` for consistency, even if the only language documented is Python. Code is typically inline or but `literalinclude` is also used, particularly if we need a particular example in a stand-alone file for testing.
Python code should be formatted as doctests in `.. code:: pycon` blocks, to ensure that the code continues to work as intended.

An isolated epsilon is easiest as a unicode character: `ε`. For more complex expressions, use `:math:` to inline LaTeX, or `.. math::` for a LaTeX block.

Respect the semantics of RST: Don't use a blockquote when `.. note::` is more appropriate.
Remember that RST is not Markdown:
```
For a ``function_name`` use double backticks.
Single asterisk is *italics*, and double is **bold**.
The `link syntax <https://example.com/>`_ trips me up,
but use :ref:`reference syntax <ref-syntax>` for internal links.
```

### Utility scripts and tests

We are gradually moving Jupyter notebook (`.ipynb`) examples to RST.
Doctests in RST give us a stronger check that the code is still functioning as intended, while notebooks are JSON internally, making diffs harder to read.
`tools/nb-to-rst.py` can make a partial translation, following our conventions for code formatting.

In CI, we check the formatting of code in docs with `blacken-docs`, and `test_docs.py` has other ad hoc checks.


### API docs

One strength of OpenDP is the generation of Python and R APIs from Rust.
However, this makes the documentation generation a little trickier:
The Rust docs need to also work as Python docs.

The first challenge is that Rust docs are Markdown,
while Sphinx would expect RST for Python.
We get around this by configuring Sphinx to recognize a special `.. end-markdown` tag:
The first part of a docstring is translated from Markdown to RST;
The remainder is treated as native RST.

The second is code examples: We wouldn't want Python examples to pollute the Rust docs.
Instead, during Python code generation, for every `rust_function` we look for a parallel `code/{rust_function}.rst`, and if present, it is added to the generated code.
